[MUSIC PLAYING]
My name is Alison Rossiter,
and I'm a photographer.
I learned photography
in the 20th century
by working in a darkroom
with film and paper.
The abstract nature of
my work has come to me
by finding these discoveries
in expired photographic paper.
These are images that
are making themselves.
They're there by chance.
These are latent images that
are made by atmospheric damage
or light leaks, someone
opening the package, mold,
all sorts of things.
I have collected papers
from every decade
of the 20th century.
It's a bit of a time
traveling experience for me
to work with a
paper that suggests
the date that the Titanic
went down, or the Depression.
When I'm using a paper
that expired in 1912,
and I pick that paper up in
2012, I've got a century.
In the 20th century,
almost everything
had an expiration
date stamped on it.
And the dates on
the paper packages
suggest a timeline
through history.
These papers were amazing.
And so what you're seeing
are the beautiful cream
colored highlights, the warm
blacks, the cold blacks.
There are different avenues
in the work with the expired
paper.
The first was just finding the
found photograms, the paper
that had a latent image on
it for one reason or another,
and I just send it
through the chemistry.
And then I found that a lot of
paper, particularly from 1930
and earlier, will just go
black in the developer.
That's all it's going
to be able to do.
So with that paper,
I set that aside,
and that's for work where
I selectively develop it.
And I will pour
chemistry down the page.
I will dip chemistry
to form a sharp line.
Or I will allow a pool of the
chemistry to float and find
its own shape on the page.
And those are all
darkroom techniques.
I remind myself every
time I'm in the darkroom
that I am dealing with silver.
The silver tarnishes, just
the way a fork and a spoon
would tarnish.
And these prints are instantly
old when I develop them.
I mean, it would take years
for that to develop naturally.
And they honor an age.
These prints do point to
the history of photography.
Do point to a time period
that is so far behind us,
but we're getting to see it.
When I think of my
lake landscapes,
I actually think
of Edward Steichen
and some of the absolutely
beautiful gum prints
that he made.
They're soft and evocative.
The harder-edged image is not
unlike Edward Weston's sand
dunes, photographed in the '30s.
Some of the most
exciting discoveries
have been simple things, such
as finding the fingerprints
of the previous photographer.
It is this absolutely
wonderful sensation
to touch something
that someone else did
over this great span of time.
My work began as a lament.
I was sad that these
things were gone.
Sad to find out that so many
beautiful materials existed
long before I was
a photographer,
and so those are gone to me.
And then the
sadness disappeared,
and I realized that I am using
these with a new purpose.
I'm bringing them back
into a contemporary venue.
And the beauty of all
these manufactured papers
are allowed to be
admired by a new audience
in a different
context completely.
[MUSIC PLAYING]